Refactor and update observables guide (#38271)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/observables-in-angular.md

# Using observables for asynchronous operations in Angular

The Angular API makes use of observables as an interface to handle a variety of common asynchronous operations. For example:

* The [AsyncPipe](#async-pipe "Handling observables from an async pipe") subscribes to an observable or promise and returns the latest value it has emitted.

* The [HTTP service](#http "Handling observables from an HTTP call") uses observables to handle AJAX requests and responses.

* The [Router](#router "Handling observables from router events") and [Reactive Forms](#forms "Handling observables from reactive form events") services use observables to listen for and respond to user-input events.

> In addition to handling the observables that the API passes or expects, you can use observables to implement your own asynchronous features. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the Angular APIs that create or consume observables, you can use them to implement your own asynchronous features. For example:
```

* Observables can ease implementation of [exponential backoff and retry](#exp-backoff "Using observables for exponential backoff").

* You can define [custom events](#event-handling "Transmitting data between components") that send observable output data from a child to a parent component.

{@a async-pipe}

## Handling observables from an async pipe

The [AsyncPipe](api/common/AsyncPipe "API reference") subscribes to an observable or promise and returns the latest value it has emitted. When a new value is emitted, the pipe marks the component to be checked for changes.

The following example binds the `time` observable to the component's view. The observable continuously updates the view with the current time.

<code-example path="observables-in-angular/src/main.ts" header="Using async pipe" region="pipe"></code-example>

{@a http}

## Handling observables from HTTP calls

Angular’s `HttpClient` returns observables from HTTP method calls. For instance, `http.get(‘/api’)` returns an observable. This provides several advantages over promise-based HTTP APIs:

> * Observables do not mutate the server response (as can occur through chained `.then()` calls on promises). Instead, you can use a series of operators to transform values as needed.

Reviewer: I know this point is copied from the previous iteration of this doc, but the wording is a bit confusing to me - both `Promise` and `Observable` allow changing the values flowing through a chain of operations. Instead, perhaps we should refocus this point on the flexibility of observable operators for describing complex data flows?

```
* Observables allow response data to be combined, filtered, and transformed through the composition of simple operators.
```
```

* HTTP requests are cancellable through the `unsubscribe()` method.
* Requests can be configured to get progress event updates.
* Failed requests can be retried easily.

{@a router}

## Handling observables from router events

[`Router.events`](api/router/Router#events "API reference") provides events as observables. You can use the `filter()` operator from RxJS to look for events of interest, and subscribe to them in order to make decisions based on the sequence of events in the navigation process. Here's an example:

<code-example path="observables-in-angular/src/main.ts" header="Router events" region="router"></code-example>

> The [ActivatedRoute](api/router/ActivatedRoute "API reference") is an injected router service that makes use of observables to get information about a route path and parameters. For example, in the following code, `ActivatedRoute.url` contains an observable that reports the route path or paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [ActivatedRoute](api/router/ActivatedRoute "API reference") is an injected router service that makes use of observables to deliver information about a route path and parameters. For example, in the following code, `ActivatedRoute.url` contains an observable that reports the route path or paths.
```

Author: good catch!

<code-example path="observables-in-angular/src/main.ts" header="ActivatedRoute" region="activated_route"></code-example>

{@a forms}

## Handling observables from reactive forms

> Reactive forms have properties that use observables to monitor form control values. The [`FormControl`](api/forms/FormControl "API reference") properties `valueChanges` and `statusChanges` contain observables that raise change events. Subscribing to an observable form-control property is a way of triggering application logic within the component class. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reactive forms have properties that expose observables to monitor form control values. The [`FormControl`](api/forms/FormControl "API reference") properties `valueChanges` and `statusChanges` contain observables that emit change events. Subscribing to an observable form-control property is a way of triggering application logic within the component class. For example:
```

<code-example path="observables-in-angular/src/main.ts" header="Reactive forms" region="forms"></code-example>

{@a type-ahead}

## Using observables for type-ahead suggestions

> Typically, a type-ahead has to do a series of separate tasks:

Author: Yes, I think so - I thought auto-completion. Is this a suitable place to go into it?

* Listen for data from an input.

> * Trim whitespace from input string and make sure it is of a minimum length.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Trim whitespace from the input string and ensure it is of a minimum length.
```

> * Debounce, so you can wait for a break in keystrokes rather than send off API requests for every keystroke.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Debounce changes to the input value, so you can wait for a break in keystrokes rather than fire API requests for every keystroke.
```

> * Don’t send a request if the value stays the same (rapidly hit a character, then backspace, for instance).

Author: I'm a fan of semicolons 😄

> * Cancel ongoing AJAX requests if their results will be invalidated by the updated results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Cancel outstanding AJAX requests if their results will be invalidated by a change in the input text.
```

> Writing this in full JavaScript can be quite involved. With observables, you can use a simple series of RxJS operators:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing this logic manually can be quite involved. With observables, you can use a simple series of RxJS operators:
```

<code-example path="practical-observable-usage/src/typeahead.ts" header="Typeahead"></code-example>

{@a exp-backoff}

## Using observables for exponential backoff

> Exponential backoff is a technique in which you retry an API after failure, making the time in between retries longer after each consecutive failure, with a maximum number of retries after which the request is considered to have failed. This can be quite complex to implement with promises and other methods of tracking AJAX calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exponential backoff is a technique in which you retry an API request after failure, increasing the time in between retries after each consecutive failure, with a maximum number of retries before the request is considered to have failed. This can be quite complex to implement with promises and other methods of tracking AJAX calls.
```

The following example shows how using observables can be more straightforward.

<code-example path="practical-observable-usage/src/backoff.ts" header="Exponential backoff"></code-example>

{@a event-handling}

> ## Transmitting data between components

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we should drop this section, or change its focus.

While `EventEmitter` does extend `Subject` (mostly as an implementation detail), Angular outputs are not _really_ exposed as `Observable`s and don't generally benefit from their flexibility.

Really the only way in which `EventEmitter` being a `Subject` is valuable to users is as a _sink_ for values, so you can do:

```typescript
someOtherObservable.pipe(...operators).subscribe(this.myEventEmitter);
```

to connect an Observable chain to an `@Output` of a component.

Author: Jason wrote this -- I would not be able to change its focus. 
Can you gin up a new example? Or should I just drop the section?
